---
title: "The Great Storm of 1987"
description: "The Great Storm of 1987 batters Kent’s coast and inland landscapes, ripping ferries from moorings at Folkestone and Dover and uprooting trees from Sevenoaks to National Trust estates. Local episodes from Chartwell to Toys Hill show how extreme weather reshapes heritage views, civic landmarks, and living environments long after the power returns."
author: Carolyn Oulton
date: 2022-02-01
categories: [ 20c ]
tags: [ Nature & environment, Coast & sea, Towns & cities, Heritage & memory ]
image: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/ea/The_White_Cliffs_of_Dover_%2848904125611%29.jpg
permalink: /20c/20c-hurricane/
published: true
toc: false  
juncture: true
---

On 15 October 1987 weather forecaster Michael Fish had no idea that he would become famous just for saying there would not be a hurricane that night. Hours later the worst storm since 1703 hit the UK, beaching the Sealink Ferry _Hengist_ when it was ripped from its moorings in [Folkestone](Q375314) harbour and overwhelming cargo vessel the Sumina with 60 ft waves in [Dover](Q179224) harbour. Buildings were destroyed, trees were uprooted and 18 people were killed in England alone.  A few days later the _Sunday Mirror_ ran a story about calls for the ‘Fish in hot water’ to resign, as thousands struggled on without power, [Sevenoaks](Q939838) came to terms with the loss of six of its famous oaks, and an escaped snow leopard from Howlett’s wildlife park in [Bekesbourne](Q4881598) was spotted in the vicinity of [Ashford](Q725261). 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Folkestone_Harbour_1980_-_geograph.org.uk_-_63040.jpg" aspect="0.639" caption="Folestone Harbour. Taken in 1980 when regular cross channel ferries operated out of Folkestone" %}

The leopard returned home a few days later, and in December seven saplings were planted in Sevenoaks. But damage to [Winston Churchill]({{ site.baseurl }}/20c/20c-churchill-chartwell/)’s home at [Chartwell](Q1067909) included the destruction of a horseshoe of beeches, leaving the view ‘shredded’. Another National Trust property to be badly affected, [Toys Hill](Q3536087), had been gifted to the nation by Octavia Hill. Fallen trees were left on the ground to create an ‘exclusion zone’ that serves to this day as a tangible reminder of the devastation. 

{% include embed/image.html src="wc:Entering_Toys_Hill_-_geograph.org.uk_-_2463533.jpg" aspect="1.488" caption="Entering Toys Hill" %}

When the St Jude Storm reached the UK on 27 October 2013 Michael Fish urged caution, but joked that people would say it ‘served him right’ when a tree fell down in his garden.

Research by Charlie, Elizabeth, Hannah, Lewis, Niamh, Polina.

{% include embed/image.html src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kent-map/forum-images/main/67b64280-c709-4af8-b956-9fc90495f2b5.jpg" aspect="0.712" caption="Trees down at Hothfield" attribution="Nick Onslow" %}

{% include embed/image.html src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kent-map/forum-images/main/b3e5ac31-fe7f-4431-9f93-275525821e72.jpg" aspect="0.702" caption="Trees down at Hothfield" attribution="Nick Onslow" %}

### Bibliography

‘A Fish in Hot Water.’ _Sunday Mirror_. 18 October 1987.   
‘Oh Winnie!’ _Daily Mirror_. 13 October 1988.   
‘Remembering How Kent Suffered in the Great Storm of October 1987’. 4 October 2020. https://www.inyourarea.co.uk/news/remembering-how-kent-suffered-in-the-great-storm-of-october-1987/   
[‘Rising from the Eye of the Great Storm’](https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/features/rising-from-the-eye-of-the-great-storm)   
_Sandwell Evening Mail_. 16 October 1987. 3. [article continued from 1].   
[Toy’s Hill Exclusion Zone](https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/features/the-toys-hill-exclusion-zone)